_pages/about.md, before:

---
permalink: /
title: ""
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

I'm a PhD Student in 💻 Computer Science at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI), where I research ⚛️ Distributed Quantum Computing and Quantum Cloud technologies.

I have a background in Computer Science and Engineering, blending industry experience in DevSecOps and ☁️ cloud environments with academic research in 🧠 NLP and LLMs. At the 🏔️ Pyrenean Institute of Ecology (IPE-CSIC), I applied these methods to extract structured information from 🌍 climate-related news. I'm currently pursuing a Master's in Artificial Intelligence Research with a specialization in 📊 Data Science.

Outside of research, I like to stay active by 🏃‍♂️ exercising regularly, playing ♟️ chess, exploring new technologies, and spending time 🌳 outdoors with friends, especially when it leads to good conversations.

## Recent Updates

- 🗓️ **Quantum Week** _(September 2025)_: I will be attending **IEEE Quantum Week 2025** in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Excited to connect with fellow researchers and learn about the latest advances in quantum computing!
- 🧑‍🏫 **Workshop** _(July 23, 2025)_: I presented a workshop on _Structured Information Extraction using Large Language Models_ to my colleagues at the Pyrenean Institute of Ecology. The workshop covered technical details of using LLMs for extracting structured data from unstructured text. You can find the workshop materials in the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/javiervela/llm-information-extraction-workshop).
- 🎓 **PhD Announcement** _(July 15, 2025)_: Starting Fall 2025, I will begin a PhD in Computer Science at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) with Prof. Tian Guo. I will work on an NSF-funded project in quantum cloud computing, focusing on algorithms and resource management tools to make quantum computing more accessible. [Read more](https://www.wpi.edu/news/quantum-cloud-research-education-leap-forward-wpi)
- 📝 **Conference Paper** _(February 6, 2025)_: _Distributed Simulation with Efficient Fault Tolerance_ was published online as part of GECON 2024. The paper proposes a replication-based approach to fault tolerance in distributed simulation, achieving minimal overhead in cloud environments. You can read it [here](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-81226-2_23), and it is also listed in the [Publications](https://javiervelatambo.com/publications/) section of this website.

<!--

TODO:
- Add photo
- Add more recent updates

  -->

Commit message:

Add masters thesis announcement and create separate page for the past annoucments

_pages/about.md, after:

---
permalink: /
title: ""
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

I'm a PhD Student in 💻 Computer Science at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI), where I research ⚛️ Distributed Quantum Computing and Quantum Cloud technologies.

I have a background in Computer Science and Engineering, blending industry experience in DevSecOps and ☁️ cloud environments with academic research in 🧠 NLP and LLMs. At the 🏔️ Pyrenean Institute of Ecology (IPE-CSIC), I applied these methods to extract structured information from 🌍 climate-related news. I have completed a Master's in Artificial Intelligence Research with a specialization in 📊 Data Science.

Outside of research, I like to stay active by 🏃‍♂️ exercising regularly, playing ♟️ chess, exploring new technologies, and spending time 🌳 outdoors with friends, especially when it leads to good conversations.

## Recent Updates

- 🌟 **Master's Thesis** _(September 2025)_: I successfully **completed my Master's degree** with the defense of my thesis and the presentation of my paper, _CienaLLM: Automated Extraction of Climate Impact from News Articles using Large Language Models_. You can find the publication in the [Publications](https://javiervelatambo.com/publications/) section of this website.
- 🗓️ **Quantum Week** _(September 2025)_: I will be attending **IEEE Quantum Week 2025** in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Excited to connect with fellow researchers and learn about the latest advances in quantum computing!
- 🧑‍🏫 **Workshop** _(July 23, 2025)_: I presented a workshop on _Structured Information Extraction using Large Language Models_ to my colleagues at the Pyrenean Institute of Ecology. The workshop covered technical details of using LLMs for extracting structured data from unstructured text. You can find the workshop materials in the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/javiervela/llm-information-extraction-workshop).

📜 [See all past announcements](announcements.md).

<!--

TODO:
- Add photo
- Add more recent updates

  -->
